[Music]
well finally here's a question I've
never asked and I'll bet you haven't
either what if the moon exploded well
for one thing the man in the moon would
be rather upset you know when we look up
at the night sky no matter what phase it
might be in on any particular night
we're always greeted by the moon so we
often take it for granted and never even
give a thought to how our life would be
without our rocky little satellite
however there was a time when the earth
had no moon until what scientists say
was a mars-sized planet like object
called Theia collided with our planet
when earth was still just a baby
a very big baby now this happened about
four billion years ago you'd think that
the approaching monster probably brought
nothing but disaster but it turned out
that even something that terrifying
could lead to something good as a result
of the massive collision a huge chunk of
the earth broke away and created the
moon after that our planet was never
alone again but have you ever wondered
what would happen if the moon suddenly
disappeared among all the worst case
apocalyptic scenarios out there this is
one of the most blood chilling running a
close second is the next spider-man
movie reboot now before we get into all
the doomsday stuff it's important to
understand just how important the moon
is for our planet most scientists are
sure that it was precisely the moon that
provided all the necessary conditions
for the appearance of life on earth
surprisingly all life on our green
planet started in the oceans it was only
much later when plants and living
creatures had evolved enough to begin
living on land what does that have to do
with the moon you ask
well one of the most important things
about the moon is the influence its
gravitational pull has on the earth this
is what makes the Seas and the oceans
rise and fall giving birth to the tides
they occur twice a day with the water
level rising and then receding again and
every time the ocean retreats different
organisms and plants get stranded in
puddles or left behind clinging to rocks
hundreds of millions of years ago these
prisoners were left with a choice either
adapt to life on the surface or perish
so if it weren't for the moon there
wouldn't have been tides to force
aquatic life forms to set up shop on
land
who knows maybe if this didn't happen
today humans would have fins gills and
mermaid tails and then you'd see real
action on keeping the oceans clean huh
the gravitational forces of the Sun also
play their role in the creation of the
tides but their influence is much weaker
after all compared to the moon the Sun
is 400 times farther from the earth and
surprisingly the Sun isn't the only
factor that influences our climate
either the moon also has a finger in
that too
the moon has a finger but we'll get into
that a bit later so now that you know
how incredibly important the moon is for
the earth let's see what would happen if
the moon should just disappear one day
would we notice and would it matter
hey hey Bob have you seen the moon it
was just here and now it's gone
I know Jim I haven't I've been looking
at my smartphone the whole time well
let's see not only would we notice but
we would also feel the grave
consequences immediately right now the
moon's gravitational force pulls the
Earth's water masses towards itself
creating a huge tidal bulge about 1.5
feet high
out in the middle of the ocean
the Sun pulls its own tidal bulge
towards itself keeping everything in
balance so if we take the moon out of
the equation that balance is broken and
72 thousand cubic miles of water come
crashing down to sea level this creates
a super massive tidal wave the likes of
which humankind has never seen before
sure hey dude Surf's Up it's going to be
gnarly California Australia Southeast
Asia
large parts of Africa Chile India and
parts of Western Europe disappear in the
rushing mass of water this doesn't bring
along destruction of cities and houses
it also means death hi dude you're
harshing my vibe 3/4 of the planet is
affected and fatalities reach 140
million worldwide that's half the
population of the United States but
that's not all the number of casualties
keeps going up as the tidal catastrophe
destroys infrastructure and triggers
earthquakes volcanic eruptions and
hurricanes the total number of lives
lost easily exceeds 1 billion on the
plus side subscriptions to the weather
channel go way up earth and civilization
never recover after this cataclysmic
disaster once the large waves calm down
and the water gets equally distributed
around the planet scavenger wars ensue
due to the new landscape on earth people
can't grow crops or develop agriculture
so resource has become extremely limited
people start fighting for food and the
scarce remnants of technology that are
still left on the planet civil wars are
likely to break out and they could be
more brutal than anything we've ever
seen before
even the Black Friday sale at Walmart
without the moon to counterbalance it
the Earth's axial tilt becomes extremely
unstable and that's yet another serious
problem on top of the existing ones this
means that our planet's core will
constantly shift and shake not unlike
what currently happens on Mars without
the moon the earth's tilt would
sometimes reach 45 degrees meaning that
we'd be
in a world spinning on its side with
Mars this extreme tilt has been known to
cause periodic ice ages and besides
setting off earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions you can imagine what an
unstable position like this entails the
equator would no longer be the hottest
part on the planet and the poles
wouldn't be as cold as they were before
in fact in a few years the ice caps
start to melt and sea levels gradually
rise the climate never goes back to the
one we're used to and the seasons become
absolutely unpredictable week after week
people see nothing but rain yet this is
followed by a dry season lasting for
months on end then everything suddenly
gets buried in snow that doesn't melt
for weeks or perhaps months the
transition between our four distinct
seasons exists no more a lot of places
on the planet become hostile and
unwelcoming towards people too harsh and
unpredictable to develop agriculture and
settle down with every passing year
larger and larger areas on earth become
desert like hi where do we go for
vacation Buffalo
[Music]
after the period of warming and melting
the ice at the polls global cooling
advances and this is because the gravity
of our satellite slows down the rotation
of our planet
so without the moon the earth would spin
faster and faster
besides much shorter days this means
that temperatures would drop since the
Sun wouldn't have enough time to heat
the surface of our planet besides that
if our earth were spinning out of
control
we'd also see tons of super powerful and
destructive hurricanes smashing into
coastal regions with cruelty and don't
forget that it's not just humans that
have to deal with all these catastrophic
changes on a moonless earth without the
moon low and high tides decreased by 75%
which disrupts entire ecosystems that
are dependent on the tides that's right
a lot of marine life uses lunar cues to
understand when it's time to reproduce
so without the moon these natural cycles
get all messed up and this dramatically
affects the whole food chain algae for
example normally come to the surface at
night directed by the moonlight this
then beckons creatures that feed on
algae like mussels crabs and sea snails
and then creatures that feed on those
algae eaters follow and this activity
goes all the way up the food chain
if this process gets disrupted we will
get mass extinctions yet new
unimaginable creatures would appear as
old ones die out and what they'd look
like nobody can possibly fathom
also just a pile on the misery our earth
would lose its body guard against
countless asteroids and meteors after
our satellite stops taking the impact of
these astronomical objects for us the
chances of them hitting our planet would
skyrocket that being said the biggest
question remains how the moon could
suddenly vanish
the only imaginable way is that our
satellite blows up this could either be
done by hostile aliens hoping to bring
our demise
hmm that gets my vote or people
themselves decide to conduct some
experiment gone wrong by the way no
official law prohibits causing harm to
the moon so it's possible and people
might be that stupid so whatever the
case that's the only theory that makes
sense
so after the moon blows up pieces of it
start bombarding the earth they aren't
as dangerous as meteors because they're
not falling towards the earth as fast
but five miles per second is still worth
worrying about the smallest pieces burn
up in the atmosphere but the bigger ones
cause further destruction and death on
the planet hey dude you totally need to
chill so what seems like not such a big
deal at first will have catastrophic
consequences to life on our dear planet
and if it loses its one and only yet so
important satellite the earth would be
an entirely different place to live and
the only Moon's left would be the ones
that we share with each other I didn't
say that
so which consequence of a moonless earth
scares you the most
massive tidal waves climate shift Wars
extinction asteroids crashing into the
planet or shudder no moon light for
those romantic evening walks tell us in
the comments below share this video with
all your friends that are fascinated by
doomsday scenarios and don't forget to
hit the like button join us on the
bright side of life